Comic Books and ldeology 249 engaged in a "cycle of quotation and Cross-quotation circulate in culture (Murray 47). Propagand are not aware they are being exposed to it. Cartoonist Peter Kuper believes comics are a pertect medium to address portentous subjects; the title 'comics' already suggests something funny, light, kid-friendly, so the reader doesn't see the POW! coming' (28). And, of course, the perception of ceive that a comic book is advocatin likely to view that comic as propaga vigilante superheroes, who use powe as fascist. Fascism is a political philo and subverts individual rights to the i from “the myths that a works best when audiences propaganda is very subjective. If we perg an ideology we do not Support, We are nda. A number of readers have described r to impose their own idea of social order, sophy that promotes devotion to authority interests of the state. To one reading, the typWV ical superhero story "shows a democratic face in that the protagonist is an Every man, yet has a pop-fascist dimension in that these unelected, law-transcending figures exercise superpowers to overcome foes" (Jewett and Lawrence 29). scholar Walter J. Ong even went so far as to label Superman a Nazi (qtd. in Are Comics' 67). Other readers worry that comic books are espousing a secular progressive agenda and will serve as "a gateway medium into heavy metal music, soft-core pornography, and anti-religious propaganda” (Fulce 32). Some of the most blatant propaganda is produced during times of war. In the following section we will consider how comic books have employed propaganda images and concepts both in support of American war efforts-chiefly during the Second World War and the Cold War that followed-and in powerful explorations and condemnations of the tragedy of war. The war comic book has existed since 1940, but it has generally been a marginal genre, and even during the years of World War II, the most vigorous propaganda was found not in war comics but in superhero comics. Superheroes at War Scholar Chris Murray believes that “even a brief look at superhero comics from the 1940s leaves little doubt that the genre as a whole fed off of the American government's programme of domestic propaganda" and reflected “the ideology of the dominant power structures and institutions” (142-143). Some of the propaganda was public-spirited and lighthearted, as with the smiling heroes who encouraged kids to get involved in paper drives and reminded parents to buy war bonds. Covers that would appeal to rowdy schoolboys, depicting rauus treatment of Nazis such as punching Adolf Hitler in the jaw or stuffing Herman Goering in a trash can, facilitated shifts in attitudes toward the enemy. Yet some of the older schoolboys would soon be on the front lines, inflicting far " serious violence on the enemy, and part of their psychological preparation ad come from the pages of the growing number of comic books actively "sed in dehumanizing the Germans, and especially the Japanese. "Comic ooks became an integral part of the Allied propaganda machine, emphasizing the need 'a maximum war effort by portraying the enemy as the inhuman off"P"ing of a vast and pernicious evil" (Savage 10).

250 THE POWER OF COMICS The most explicitly propagandistic comic books dehumanized and demo. nized the enemy. Arrogant Germans wearing monocles leered as they branded their captives with a red-hot swastika. Superheroes were constantly rescu teenage sidekicks or beautiful women just as their partially naked bodies Wcre about to suffer under a German lash. German officers Were arrogant, the con mon soldiers were often barbaric, and they all delighted in cruelty. Yet the tortions of form and character they suffered were nothing compared to the deformities visited upon the Japanese. "The Japanese al wore glasses and had buck teeth (or, often, fangs) and claw-like fingernails. Their skins were usually yellow, often greenish-yellow" (Don Thompson 112). Drawn as fanged, clawed, and drooling, the Japanese villains hardly appeared human, and, in fact, were often depicted as some sort of animal: rats and snakes with slanted, squinty eyes were popular. They were reduced to a form of vermin that seemed only natural to exterminate. Depictions of a depraved and hideous enemy were soon contrasted with stalwart, handsome heroes with patriotic names and red, white, and blue cotumes. The Shield (Pep Comics #1, 1940), the first of the patriotic heroes embodying the spirit of America, was the only such character for half a year. But as the war in Europe continued to dominate the headlines in America, the Shield was followed by star-spangled, freedom-defending heroes such as Uncle Sam, the Patriot, American Eagle, and Liberty Belle. Comics historian Michelle Nolan has identified sixty-one patriotic superheroes who debuted in comic books from 1940 to 1944, and forty-seven of those characters appeared before Pearl Harbor and the United States' entry into the war ("Patriotic”). Before America was at war with Germany, Captain America had punched Hitler in the jaw (Captain America Comics #1, 1941), the Flag had toppled Nazi tanks (Our Flag Comics #2, 1941), and U.S. Jones had "plummeted into the midst of the Nazis.” (U.S. Jones #1, 1941). The patriotic hero comics were clearly advocating for America to step up and deal with a manifest evil. Once America did make a declaration of war, DC superheroes generally contented themselves with protecting the homeland from spies and saboteurs, but the Timely super heroes (Captain America, Sub-Mariner, Human Torch, etc.) were in the thick of the war, sinking a prodigious number of Japanese cruisers 1 and German U-boats. Nor NONSENSE, GOOD CHANA yOU AND THE BOY SHALL PROVIDE THE FANG WITH RARE SPORT, YOU SHALL BOTH DE SCREAMING IN AGONY AT THE -ANOS OF WAY ARTFLJU. TORTURERSA | l ܂ ܬ ܢ . . FIGURE 11.2, Asians were often presented as Subhuman in drawings such as this one from Captain America Comics #6 (1941) (O 2008 Marvel Entertainment, Inc. and its subsidiaries were the Timely superheroes merely fighting a sanitized war against machinery; the human enemy often felt their righteous wrath in gruesome ways. Because the enemy was so often presented as inhuman vermin deservo of extermination, "it WS

Comic Books and Ideology War Comics Most early comic books in the war genre were 1hOt superhero comics, but they generally supported t American cause and glorified the act of war. The vas presented the heroic adventures of soldiers amidst t it is not surprising that comic books during “the g War II-were presented in simple terms of good a guys, chiefly the Americans, always achieved Victor tious stories might detail the struggles of an indi inner conflict before engaging in an act of COurag war were seldom considered. Many comic book creators were no doubt moti port of a just cause, but there was also some pressure to adhere to the dominant ideology of the time. Government agencies, aware of the power of images to support or subvert the American cause in World War II and the Cold War, devoted most of their effort to scrutinizing the output of the American film industry, but war comics did not totally escape their notice. Some comic books deemed contrary to the best interests of the United States war effort were banned from distribution on military bases. After one banning incident, the Navy received “the assurance of the publishers that all gory and pacifist features have been removed from their product" (U.S. House 29). In the ideological struggle between democracy and communism that developed in the aftermath of World War II, "The cold war ideology of American comic books was nakedly displayed in the war and espionage comics of the early 1950s” (Rifas, "Cold War” 3). The Blackhawks, a squadron of pilots representing most of the Allied nations, made their first appearance in 1941 (Military Comics #1) and spent the rest of the war besting a multitude of outlandish Nazi opponents. With the end of World War II, the Blackhawks soon found a new purpose: opposing the threat of "invasion and tyranny” from an unnamed "aggressor nation,” “dictator nation," or "peoples' dictatorship.” Even when the opponents were called marauding pirates, they clearly served as surrogates for the Soviet Union, as illustrated by one series of panels in which the skull and crossbones of the pirate flag subtly morphed into the hammer and sickle of the Soviet flag. Hostilities with the communists were more open when it came to the Korean Conflict. While most of the popular culture of the time ignored the war in Korea, war comic books reached the peak of their popularity in the early 195 Os, and more than one hundred different titles featured the conflict in Korea. While rtists often depicted the North Koreans and Chinese as “subhuman caricares, much as they had done with the Japanese in World War II, the exuberant 'War Propaganda of the previous war was often muted in Korean War tales t majority of war comics he thrilling action of war. ood war"-that is, World nd evil, and that the good y. A few of the more ambividual soldier Overcoming e. The causes or impact of vated by patriotism or sup
